TODO.md, before:

# TODO

### Assembler

- [ ] Assemble: text + templates

### M-IDE
- BubbleTea
- templates
- views (e.g. notes)
- macros
- snippets
- apply(...)
- (?) MQL

- [ ] Optimise parsing
      - [x] Rework event factory lists as generic functions
            - [ ] MarshalBinary
                  - [ ] context ???
            - [ ] Validate
                  - missing/wrong EndOfTrack
            - [ ] Only use ctx when parsing i.e. it shouldn't be a field of MTrk
                  - https://dmitrykandalov.com/coroutines-as-threads
      - [ ] Post process tick
      - [ ] NoteOn - unmarshal note and alias and throw an error if they aren't 
            blank and also don't more or less match note value
      - [ ] Move FormatNote to NoteOn (pass ctx as a parameter)
      - [ ] Rework decoder as described in https://go.dev/blog/defer-panic-and-recover
      - [ ] VLQ: TestMarshalBinary
      - [ ] VLQ: UnmarshalBinary
      - [ ] VLF: TestMarshalBinary
      - [ ] VLF: UnmarshalBinary

      - [ ] (maybe) Remove superfluous Event struct
            - (?) or just move bytes and tick back into it so it doesn't clutter event struct
            - (?) bytes are only really used for disassemble
            - (?) tick is used for disassemble and notes
            - (?) so .. either initialise tick and bytes from decoder or move tick and byte into Event
            - https://stackoverflow.com/questions/66118867/go-generics-is-it-possible-to-embed-generic-structs
            - https://stackoverflow.com/questions/71444847/go-with-generics-type-t-is-pointer-to-type-parameter-not-type-parameter


- [ ] NoteOn with 0 velocity -> NoteOff
      - [x] Rework notes.go
      - [ ] Replace Note.End with Note.Duration
      - [ ] Unit tests
            - [x] Basic notes
            - [ ] NoteOn with velocity 0
      - [ ] --use-note-0
      - [x] Always printing debug info
      - [x] debug output is weird

- [ ] MIDI file grammar
      - (?) ASN.1
      - (?) EBNF
      - (?) Grammar stack
      - (?) Treesitter
      - (?) https://github.com/codemechanic/midi-sysex-grammar
      - (?) https://www.synalysis.net/grammars/
      - (?) MidiQL

- [ ] Fuzz parser/assembler
      - https://www.pypy.org/posts/2022/12/jit-bug-finding-smt-fuzzing.html

- (?) https://stackoverflow.com/questions/27242652/colorizing-golang-test-run-output
- (?) https://openziti.io/golang-aha-moments-generics

### Transpose
- [ ] Transpose while decoding - otherwise lose track of stuff like note format
      - (!) or - only keep actual MIDI stuff and generate interpretation on the fly for e.g. disassemble
- https://github.com/dolmen-go/goproc

### Click Track

- [ ] --track option (default to track 1)
- [ ] --format consolidated/events
- [ ] Export summary as JSON
- [ ] Export clicks as JSON
- [ ] Export as MIDI
      - [ ] Map beats to clicks
      - [ ] Configurable kick/snare/etc


### Export
- [ ] TSV

### Disassembler

- [ ] Document custom templates
- [ ] Format 2
- [ ] Coloured output (Charm/BubbleTea ?)
- [ ] Add outstanding events to TestDecode
- (?) Rework decoder using tags/reflection/grammar+packrat-parser/kaitai/binpac/somesuch
- [ ] Reference files
      - Format 0
      - [x] Format 1
      - Format 2
- [ ] Decode RPNs
      - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_MIDI
- [ ] Channel 0-15 or 1-16

### Notes 

- (?) [sync/errgroup](https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/sync/errgroup) for validation 
- [ ] --compact format (JSON): puts notes on one line
- [ ] Configurable formats
- [ ] Check loss of precision
- [ ] Unit tests for tempo map to time conversion
- [ ] Pretty print
- [ ] Format 0
- [ ] Format 2
- [ ] NoteOn with 0 velocity -> NoteOff

## TODO

- https://sound.stackexchange.com/questions/51637/velocity-randomizer-any-free-midi-editor-with-this-feature
  - https://stackoverflow.com/questions/46182767/how-to-add-random-number-using-awk-command
- CSS a la Werkmeister
- M-IDE
  - https://arcan-fe.com/2022/10/15/whipping-up-a-new-shell-lashcat9/
  - https://arcan-fe.com/2021/04/12/introducing-pipeworld/
- https://music.stackexchange.com/questions/125617/midi-controlled-metronome

### Other

1.  Tremolo/vibrato
2.  TSV
3.  Export to S-expressions
4.  VSCode plugin
    -  [Language Server Protocol Tutorial: From VSCode to Vim](https://www.toptal.com/javascript/language-server-protocol-tutorial)
5.  Convert between formats 0, 1 and 2
6.  [Manufacturer ID's](https://www.midi.org/specifications-old/category/reference-tables) (?)
7.  Check against reference files from [github:nfroidure/midifile](https://github.com/nfroidure/midifile)
8.  [How to use a field of struct or variable value as template name?](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/28830543/how-to-use-a-field-of-struct-or-variable-value-as-template-name)
9. Online/Javascript version
10. https://github.com/go-interpreter/chezgo
12. SDK (?)
13. mmap
14. REST/GraphQL interface
15. https://sound.stackexchange.com/questions/39457/how-to-open-midi-file-in-text-editor
16. https://github.com/mido/mido
17. [Janet](https://janet-lang.org)
18. [Charm/BubbleTea](https://dlvhdr.me/posts/the-renaissance-of-the-command-line)
19. [GNU Poke](https://youtu.be/Nwb_8VJ5ZeQ)
20. [go-jq](https://github.com/itchyny/gojq)
21. [Katai struct](https://kaitai.io/)
22. [PotLuck](https://www.inkandswitch.com/potluck)
    - [LAPIS](http://groups.csail.mit.edu/graphics/lapis/doc/papers.html)
23. https://futureofcoding.org/catalog/
24. https://github.com/codemechanic/midi-sysex-grammar
25. [WUFFS](https://github.com/google/wuffs)
26. [Apex](https://apexlang.io)

Commit message:

refactoring: moved event reader back inside MIDI package

TODO.md, after:

# TODO

- Rework everything so that SMF & MThd & MTrk are just containers i.e. all the complication around
  marshalling and unmarshalling happens in decoders.
  - [x] UnmarshalBinary
  - [ ] Rework byte reader hack

### Assembler

- [ ] Assemble: text + templates

### M-IDE
- BubbleTea
- templates
- views (e.g. notes)
- macros
- snippets
- apply(...)
- (?) MQL

- [ ] Optimise parsing
      - [ ] context ???
      - [ ] Validate
            - missing/wrong EndOfTrack
      - [ ] Only use ctx when parsing i.e. it shouldn't be a field of MTrk
            - https://dmitrykandalov.com/coroutines-as-threads
      - [ ] Post process tick
      - [ ] NoteOn - unmarshal note and alias and throw an error if they aren't 
            blank and also don't more or less match note value
      - [ ] Move FormatNote to NoteOn (pass ctx as a parameter)
      - [ ] Rework decoder as described in https://go.dev/blog/defer-panic-and-recover
      - [ ] VLQ: TestMarshalBinary
      - [ ] VLQ: UnmarshalBinary
      - [ ] VLF: TestMarshalBinary
      - [ ] VLF: UnmarshalBinary

      - [ ] (maybe) Remove superfluous Event struct
            - (?) or just move bytes and tick back into it so it doesn't clutter event struct
            - (?) bytes are only really used for disassemble
            - (?) tick is used for disassemble and notes
            - (?) so .. either initialise tick and bytes from decoder or move tick and byte into Event
            - https://stackoverflow.com/questions/66118867/go-generics-is-it-possible-to-embed-generic-structs
            - https://stackoverflow.com/questions/71444847/go-with-generics-type-t-is-pointer-to-type-parameter-not-type-parameter


- [ ] NoteOn with 0 velocity -> NoteOff
      - [x] Rework notes.go
      - [ ] Replace Note.End with Note.Duration
      - [ ] Unit tests
            - [x] Basic notes
            - [ ] NoteOn with velocity 0
      - [ ] --use-note-0
      - [x] Always printing debug info
      - [x] debug output is weird

- [ ] MIDI file grammar
      - (?) ASN.1
      - (?) EBNF
      - (?) Grammar stack
      - (?) Treesitter
      - (?) https://github.com/codemechanic/midi-sysex-grammar
      - (?) https://www.synalysis.net/grammars/
      - (?) MidiQL

- [ ] Fuzz parser/assembler
      - https://www.pypy.org/posts/2022/12/jit-bug-finding-smt-fuzzing.html

- (?) https://stackoverflow.com/questions/27242652/colorizing-golang-test-run-output
- (?) https://openziti.io/golang-aha-moments-generics

### Transpose
- [ ] Transpose while decoding - otherwise lose track of stuff like note format
      - (!) or - only keep actual MIDI stuff and generate interpretation on the fly for e.g. disassemble
- https://github.com/dolmen-go/goproc

### Click Track

- [ ] --track option (default to track 1)
- [ ] --format consolidated/events
- [ ] Export summary as JSON
- [ ] Export clicks as JSON
- [ ] Export as MIDI
      - [ ] Map beats to clicks
      - [ ] Configurable kick/snare/etc


### Export
- [ ] TSV

### Disassembler

- [ ] Document custom templates
- [ ] Format 2
- [ ] Coloured output (Charm/BubbleTea ?)
- [ ] Add outstanding events to TestDecode
- (?) Rework decoder using tags/reflection/grammar+packrat-parser/kaitai/binpac/somesuch
- [ ] Reference files
      - Format 0
      - [x] Format 1
      - Format 2
- [ ] Decode RPNs
      - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_MIDI
- [ ] Channel 0-15 or 1-16

### Notes 

- (?) [sync/errgroup](https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/sync/errgroup) for validation 
- [ ] --compact format (JSON): puts notes on one line
- [ ] Configurable formats
- [ ] Check loss of precision
- [ ] Unit tests for tempo map to time conversion
- [ ] Pretty print
- [ ] Format 0
- [ ] Format 2
- [ ] NoteOn with 0 velocity -> NoteOff

## TODO

- https://sound.stackexchange.com/questions/51637/velocity-randomizer-any-free-midi-editor-with-this-feature
  - https://stackoverflow.com/questions/46182767/how-to-add-random-number-using-awk-command
- CSS a la Werkmeister
- M-IDE
  - https://arcan-fe.com/2022/10/15/whipping-up-a-new-shell-lashcat9/
  - https://arcan-fe.com/2021/04/12/introducing-pipeworld/
- https://music.stackexchange.com/questions/125617/midi-controlled-metronome

### Other

1.  Tremolo/vibrato
2.  TSV
3.  Export to S-expressions
4.  VSCode plugin
    -  [Language Server Protocol Tutorial: From VSCode to Vim](https://www.toptal.com/javascript/language-server-protocol-tutorial)
5.  Convert between formats 0, 1 and 2
6.  [Manufacturer ID's](https://www.midi.org/specifications-old/category/reference-tables) (?)
7.  Check against reference files from [github:nfroidure/midifile](https://github.com/nfroidure/midifile)
8.  [How to use a field of struct or variable value as template name?](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/28830543/how-to-use-a-field-of-struct-or-variable-value-as-template-name)
9. Online/Javascript version
10. https://github.com/go-interpreter/chezgo
12. SDK (?)
13. mmap
14. REST/GraphQL interface
15. https://sound.stackexchange.com/questions/39457/how-to-open-midi-file-in-text-editor
16. https://github.com/mido/mido
17. [Janet](https://janet-lang.org)
18. [Charm/BubbleTea](https://dlvhdr.me/posts/the-renaissance-of-the-command-line)
19. [GNU Poke](https://youtu.be/Nwb_8VJ5ZeQ)
20. [go-jq](https://github.com/itchyny/gojq)
21. [Katai struct](https://kaitai.io/)
22. [PotLuck](https://www.inkandswitch.com/potluck)
    - [LAPIS](http://groups.csail.mit.edu/graphics/lapis/doc/papers.html)
23. https://futureofcoding.org/catalog/
24. https://github.com/codemechanic/midi-sysex-grammar
25. [WUFFS](https://github.com/google/wuffs)
26. [Apex](https://apexlang.io)
